HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Genet Med. 2015 May ; 17(5): 405–424. doi:10.1038/gim.2015.30.

Standards and Guidelines for the Interpretation of Sequence
Variants: A Joint Consensus Recommendation of the American
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association
for Molecular Pathology

Author Manuscript

Sue Richards [Chair, ACMG],
Knight Diagnostic Laboratories; Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics; Oregon Health &
Science University, Portland, OR, USA
Nazneen Aziz [CAP],
College of American Pathologists, Chicago, IL, USA
Sherri Bale [ACMG],
GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, USA
David Bick [ACMG],
Section of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown
Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI, USA

Author Manuscript

Soma Das [ACMG],
Department of Human Genetics, Clinical Molecular Genetics Laboratory, The University of
Chicago, Chicago, USA
Julie Gastier-Foster [AMP],
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Cytogenetics/Molecular Genetics Laboratory; Ohio State
University College of Medicine, Departments of Pathology and Pediatrics, Columbus, OH, USA

Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Nazneen Aziz. Current address: Phoenix Children’s Hospital

Author Manuscript

Conflicts of Interest: All workgroup members are clinical service providers. No commercial conflict of interest was reported for Sue
Richards, David Bick, Soma Das, Wayne Grody, Elaine Spector, Julie Gastier-Foster, Nazneen Aziz, and Karl Voelkerding. The
following workgroup members have a commercial conflict of interest: Sherri Bale (GeneDx, BioReference (stock), Advisory boards
for RainDance, Ingenuity); Madhuri Hegde (Advisor for: Oxford Genetic Technologies, Tessarae, Ingenuity/Qiagen); Elaine Lyon
(Advisory board for Complete Genomics); and Heidi Rehm (Scientific advisory boards: Ingenuity/Qiagen, Complete Genomics,
Knome, Focused Genomics).
Disclaimer: These ACMG Standards and Guidelines were developed primarily as an educational resource for clinical laboratory
geneticists to help them provide quality clinical laboratory services. Adherence to these standards and guidelines is voluntary and does
not necessarily assure a successful medical outcome. These Standards and Guidelines should not be considered inclusive of all proper
procedures and tests or exclusive of other procedures and tests that are reasonably directed to obtaining the same results. In
determining the propriety of any specific procedure or test, the clinical laboratory geneticist should apply his or her own professional
judgment to the specific circumstances presented by the individual patient or specimen. Clinical laboratory geneticists are encouraged
to document in the patient’s record the rationale for the use of a particular procedure or test, whether or not it is in conformance with
these Standards and Guidelines. They also are advised to take notice of the date any particular guideline was adopted, and to consider
other relevant medical and scientific information that becomes available after that date. It also would be prudent to consider whether
intellectual property interests may restrict the performance of certain tests and other procedures.
These Standards and Guidelines were approved by the ACMG Board of Directors on December 15, 2014 and the AMP Board of
Directors on January 9, 2015.

Richards et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

Wayne W. Grody [ACMG],
Departments of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Pediatrics, and Human Genetics, UCLA
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Madhuri Hegde [ACMG],
Emory Genetics Laboratory, Department of Human Genetics, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia,
USA
Elaine Lyon [AMP],
Department of Pathology, ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA

Author Manuscript

Elaine Spector [ACMG],
Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Children’s Hospital Colorado, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical School, Denver, CO, USA
Karl Voelkerding [CAP], and
Department of Pathology, ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
Heidi L. Rehm [Co-Chair, ACMG] on behalf of On behalf of the ACMG Laboratory Quality
Assurance Committee
Partners Laboratory for Molecular Medicine and Department of Pathology, Brigham & Women’s
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

Abstract

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) previously developed
guidance for the interpretation of sequence variants.1 In the past decade, sequencing technology
has evolved rapidly with the advent of high-throughput next generation sequencing. By adopting
and leveraging next generation sequencing, clinical laboratories are now performing an ever
increasing catalogue of genetic testing spanning genotyping, single genes, gene panels, exomes,
genomes, transcriptomes and epigenetic assays for genetic disorders. By virtue of increased
complexity, this paradigm shift in genetic testing has been accompanied by new challenges in
sequence interpretation. In this context, the ACMG convened a workgroup in 2013 comprised of
representatives from the ACMG, the Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP) and the College
of American Pathologists (CAP) to revisit and revise the standards and guidelines for the
interpretation of sequence variants. The group consisted of clinical laboratory directors and
clinicians. This report represents expert opinion of the workgroup with input from ACMG, AMP
and CAP stakeholders. These recommendations primarily apply to the breadth of genetic tests
used in clinical laboratories including genotyping, single genes, panels, exomes and genomes.
This report recommends the use of specific standard terminology: ‘pathogenic’, ‘likely
pathogenic’, ‘uncertain significance’, ‘likely benign’, and ‘benign’ to describe variants identified
in Mendelian disorders. Moreover, this recommendation describes a process for classification of
variants into these five categories based on criteria using typical types of variant evidence (e.g.
population data, computational data, functional data, segregation data, etc.). Because of the
increased complexity of analysis and interpretation of clinical genetic testing described in this
report, the ACMG strongly recommends that clinical molecular genetic testing should be

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

performed in a CLIA-approved laboratory with results interpreted by a board-certified clinical
molecular geneticist or molecular genetic pathologist or equivalent.

Keywords
clinical genetic testing; ACMG laboratory guideline; sequence variation; variant terminology;
interpretation; reporting

Introduction

Author Manuscript

Increasingly, clinical molecular laboratories are detecting novel sequence variants in the
course of testing patient specimens for a rapidly increasing number of genes associated with
genetic disorders. While some phenotypes are associated with a single gene, many are
associated with multiple genes. Our understanding of the clinical significance of any given
sequence variant falls along a gradient, ranging from those in which the variant is almost
certainly pathogenic for a disorder to those that are almost certainly benign. While the
previous ACMG recommendations provided interpretative categories of sequence variants
and an algorithm for interpretation, the recommendations did not provide defined terms or
detailed variant classification guidance.1 This report describes updated standards and
guidelines for classification of sequence variants using criteria informed by expert opinion
and empirical data.

Methods

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

In 2013 a workgroup consisting of ACMG, AMP, and CAP members, representing clinical
laboratory directors and clinicians, was formed with the goal of developing a
recommendation for the use of standard terminology for classifying sequence variants using
available evidence weighted according to a system developed through expert opinion,
workgroup consensus and community input. In order to assess the views of the clinical
laboratory community, surveys were sent to over 100 sequencing laboratories, from the
United States (US) and Canada that were listed in GeneTests.org, requesting input on
terminology preferences and evaluation of evidence for classifying variants. Laboratory
testing experience included rare disease as well as pharmacogenomics and somatic cancer
testing. The first survey, aimed at assessing terminology preferences, was sent in February
2013 and the results presented in an open forum at the 2013 ACMG annual meeting
including over 75 attendees. Survey respondents represented over 45 laboratories in North
America. The outcome of the survey and open forum indicated that: (1) a five-tier
terminology system using the terms pathogenic, likely pathogenic, uncertain significance,
likely benign, and benign was preferred and already in use by a majority of laboratories, and
(2) the first effort of the workgroup should focus on Mendelian and mitochondrial variants.
In the first survey, laboratories were also asked to provide their protocols for variant
assessment, and eleven shared their methods. By analyzing all the protocols submitted, the
workgroup developed a set of criteria to weight variant evidence and a set of rules for
combining criteria to arrive at one of the five classification tiers. Workgroup members tested
the scheme within their laboratories for several weeks using variants already classified in
Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

their laboratories and/or by the broader community. In addition, typical examples of variants
harboring the most common types of evidence were tested for classification assignment to
ensure the system would classify those variants according to current approaches consistently
applied by workgroup members. A second survey was sent out to the same laboratories
identified through GeneTests.org as well as through AMP’s list serve of approximately 2000
members in August of 2013 with the proposed classification scheme and a detailed
supplement describing how to use each of the criteria. Laboratories were asked to use the
scheme and to provide feedback as to the suitability and relative weighting of each criteria,
the ease of use of the classification system, and whether they would adopt such a system in
their own laboratory. Responses from over 33 laboratories indicated majority support for the
proposed approach and feedback further guided the development of the proposed standards
and guidelines.

Author Manuscript

In November 2013, the workgroup held a workshop at the AMP meeting with over 50
attendees, presenting the revised classification criteria and two potential scoring systems.
One system is consistent with the approach presented here and the other a point system
whereby each criterion is given a number of points, assigning positive points for pathogenic
criteria and negative points for benign criteria, with the total defining the variant class. With
an audience response system, the participants were asked how they would weight each
criterion (as strong, moderate or supporting, or not used) during evaluation of variant
evidence. Again, the responses were incorporated into the classification system presented
here. It should be noted that while the majority of respondents did favor a point system, the
workgroup felt that the assignment of specific points for each criterion implied a quantitative
level of understanding of each criterion that is currently not supported scientifically and does
not take into account the complexity of interpreting genetic evidence.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The workgroup also evaluated the literature for recommendations from other professional
societies and working groups that have developed variant classification guidelines for wellstudied genes in breast cancer, colon cancer, and cystic fibrosis and statistical analysis
programs for quantitative evaluation of variants in select diseases.2–5 While those variant
analysis guidelines are useful in a specific setting, it was difficult to apply their proposed
criteria to all genes and in different laboratory settings. The variant classification approach
described in this paper is meant to be applicable to variants in all Mendelian genes whether
identified by single gene tests, multi-gene panels, exome sequencing or genome sequencing.
We expect that this variant classification approach will evolve as technology and knowledge
improves. We should also note that those working in specific disease groups should continue
to develop more focused guidance regarding the classification of variants in specific genes
given that the applicability and weight assigned to certain criteria may vary by gene and
disease.

General Considerations
Terminology
A mutation is defined as a permanent change in the nucleotide sequence, while a
polymorphism is defined as a variant with a frequency above 1%. However, the terms
“mutation” and “polymorphism”, which have been used widely, often lead to confusion due

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

to incorrect assumptions of pathogenic and benign effects respectively. Thus, it is
recommended that both terms be replaced by the term “variant” with the following
modifiers: (1) pathogenic, (2) likely pathogenic, (3) uncertain significance, (4) likely benign,
or (5) benign. While these modifiers may not address all human phenotypes, they comprise a
five-tier system of classification for variants relevant to Mendelian disease as addressed in
this guidance. It is recommended that all assertions of pathogenicity (including "likely
pathogenic") be reported with respect to a condition and inheritance pattern (e.g. c.
1521_1523delCTT (p.Phe508del), pathogenic, cystic fibrosis, autosomal recessive).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

It should be noted that some laboratories may choose to have additional tiers (e.g. subclassification of variants of uncertain significance (VUSs), particularly for internal use) and
this practice is not considered inconsistent with these recommendations. It should also be
noted that the terms recommended here differ somewhat from the current recommendations
for classifying copy number variants (CNVs) detected by cytogenetic microarray.6 The
schema recommended for CNVs, while also 5-tiers, uses "uncertain clinical significance likely pathogenic” and “uncertain clinical significance - likely benign”. The majority of the
workgroup was not supportive of using “uncertain significance” to modify the terms “likely
pathogenic” or “likely benign" given that it was felt that the criteria presented here to
classify variants into the “likely” categories included stronger evidence than outlined in the
CNV guideline and combining these two categories would create confusion for the
healthcare providers and individuals receiving clinical reports. However, it was felt that the
use of the term "likely" should be restricted to variants where the data supports a high
likelihood that it is pathogenic or a high likelihood that it is benign. Although there is no
quantitative definition of the term "likely", guidance has been proposed in certain variant
classification settings. However, a survey of the community during an ACMG open forum
suggested a much wider range of uses of the term ‘likely’. Recognizing this, we propose that
the terms ‘likely pathogenic’ and ‘likely benign’ be used to mean greater than 90% certainty
of a variant either being disease-causing or benign in order to provide laboratories with a
common, albeit arbitrary, definition. Similarly, the International Agency for Research on
Cancer (IARC) guideline2 supports a 95% level of certainty of pathogenicity, but the
workgroup (confirmed by feedback in the ACMG open forum) felt that clinicians and
patients were willing to tolerate a slightly higher chance of error leading to the 90%
decision. It should also be noted that at present most variants do not have data to support a
quantitative assignment of variant certainty to any of the five categories given the
heterogeneous nature of most diseases. It is hoped that over time experimental and statistical
approaches will be developed to objectively assign pathogenicity confidence to variants and
that more rigorous approaches to defining what the clinical community desires in terms of
confidence will more fully inform terminologies and likelihoods.
The use of new terminologies may require education of the community. Professional
societies are encouraged to engage in educating all laboratories as well as healthcare
providers on the use of these terms and laboratories are also encouraged to directly educate
their ordering physicians.

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 6

Nomenclature

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

A uniform nomenclature, informed by a set of standardized criteria, is recommended to
ensure the unambiguous designation of a variant and enable effective sharing and
downstream use of genomic information. A standard gene variant nomenclature (http://
www.hgvs.org/mutnomen) is maintained and versioned by the Human Genome Variation
Society (HGVS)7 and its use is recommended as the primary guideline for determining
variant nomenclature except as noted.6 Laboratories should note the version being used in
their test methods. Tools are available to provide correct HGVS nomenclature for describing
variants (https://mutalyzer.nl).8 Clinical reports should include sequence reference(s) to
ensure unambiguous naming of the variant at the DNA level as well as provide coding and
protein nomenclature to assist in functional interpretations (e.g., “g.” for genomic sequence,
“c.” for coding DNA sequence, “p.” for protein, “m.” for mitochondria, etc.). The coding
nomenclature should be described using the “A” of the ATG translation initiation codon as
position number 1. Where historical alternate nomenclature has been used, current
nomenclature should be used with an additional notation of the historical naming. The
reference sequence should be complete and derived from either the NCBI RefSeq database
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/RefSeq/)9 with the version number or the Locus Reference
Genomic (LRG) database (http://www.lrg-sequence.org).10 Genomic coordinates should be
used and defined according to a standard genome build (e.g. hg19) or a genomic reference
sequence that covers the entire gene (including the 5' and 3' untranslated regions (UTRs) and
promoter). A reference transcript for each gene should be used and provided in the report
when describing coding variants. The transcript should either represent the longest known
transcript and/or most clinically relevant transcript. Community-supported reference
transcripts can often be identified through LRG10, CCDS Database11, Human Gene
Mutation Database (http://www.hgmd.cf.ac.uk), ClinVar (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
clinvar) or a locus-specific database. However, laboratories should evaluate the impact of
the variant on all clinically relevant transcripts including alternate transcripts that contain
additional exons or extended untranslated regions when there are known variants in these
regions that are clinically interpretable.

Author Manuscript

Not all types of variants (e.g., complex variants) are covered by the HGVS
recommendations, but possible descriptions for complex variants have been reported.7,12 In
addition, this ACMG recommendation supports three specific exceptions to the HGVS
nomenclature rules: 1) "X" is still considered acceptable for use in reporting nonsense
variants in addition to the current HGVS recommendation of "*" and "Ter"; 2) it is
recommended that exons be numbered according to the chosen reference transcript used to
designate the variant; and 3) the term “pathogenic” is recommended instead of “affects
function” as clinical interpretation is typically evaluating pathogenicity directly.
Literature and Database Use
A large number of databases contain a growing number of variants that are continuously
being discovered in the human genome. When classifying and reporting a variant, clinical
laboratories may find valuable information in databases, as well as in published literature.
As noted above, sequence databases can also be used to identify appropriate reference

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

sequences. Databases can be useful for gathering information, but should be used with
caution.
Population databases (Table 1) are useful in obtaining the frequencies of variants in large
populations. Population databases cannot be assumed to include only healthy individuals,
and are known to contain pathogenic variants. These population databases do not contain
extensive information regarding the functional effect of these variants or any possible
associated phenotypes. When using population databases, one must determine whether
healthy or disease cohorts were used, and if possible, whether more than one individual in a
family was included, and the age range of the subjects.

Author Manuscript

Disease databases (Table 1) primarily contain variants found in patients with disease and
assessment of the variants’ pathogenicity. Disease and gene-specific databases often contain
variants that are incorrectly classified including incorrect claims published in peer-reviewed
literature because many databases do not perform primary review of evidence. When using
disease databases, it is important to consider how patients were ascertained, as described
below.
When using databases, clinical laboratories should: (1) determine how frequently the
database is updated, whether data curation is supported and what methods were used for
curation; (2) confirm the use of HGVS nomenclature and determine the genome build and
transcript references used for naming variants; (3) determine the degree to which data is
validated for analytical accuracy (e.g. low pass next generation sequencing versus Sangervalidated variants) and evaluate any quality metrics that are provided to assess data
accuracy, which may require reading associated publications; and (4) determine the source
and independence of the observations listed.

Author Manuscript

Variant assessment also includes searching the scientific and medical literature. Literature
using older nomenclature and classification or based on a single observation should be used
with caution. In identifying individuals and families with a variant, along with associated
phenotypes, it is important to consider how patients were ascertained. This caveat is
important when assessing data from publications as affected individuals and related
individuals are often reported multiple times depending on the context and size of the study.
This may be due to authorship overlap, inter-laboratory collaborations, or a proband and
family members being followed across different clinical systems. This may mistakenly lead
to duplicate counting of affected patients and a false increase in variant frequency.
Overlapping authorship or institutions is the first clue to the potential for overlapping
datasets.

Author Manuscript

Clinical laboratories should implement an internal system to track all sequence variants
identified in each gene and clinical assertions when reported. This is important for tracking
genotype-phenotype correlations and the frequency of variants in affected and normal
populations. Clinical laboratories are encouraged to contribute to variant databases, such as
ClinVar, including clinical assertions and evidence used for the variant classification, to aid
in the continued understanding of the impact of human variation. Clinical information
should be provided whenever possible, following Health Insurance Portability and

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulations for privacy. Clinical laboratories are encouraged to
form collaborations with clinicians to provide clinical information to better understand how
genotype influences clinical phenotype and resolve differences in variant interpretation
between laboratories. Because of the great potential to aid clinical laboratory practice,
efforts are underway for clinical variant databases to be expanded and standardized.
Standardization will provide easier access to updated information as well as facilitating
submission from the clinical laboratory. For example, the ClinVar database allows for the
deposition of variants with clinical observations and assertions, with review status tracked to
enable a more transparent view of the levels of quality of the curation.
Computational (In Silico) Predictive Programs

Author Manuscript

A variety of in-silico tools, both publicly and commercially available, can aid in the
interpretation of sequence variants. The algorithms used by each tool may differ, but can
include determination of the effect of the sequence variant at the nucleotide and amino acid
level including determination of the effect of the variant on the primary and alternative gene
transcripts, other genomic elements, as well as the potential impact of the variant on the
protein. The two main categories of such tools include those that predict whether a missense
change is damaging to the resultant protein function or structure, and those that predict if
there is an effect on splicing (Table 2). Newer tools are beginning to address additional noncoding sequences.13

Author Manuscript

The impact of a missense change depends on criteria such as the evolutionary conservation
of an amino acid or nucleotide, the location and context within the protein sequence, and the
biochemical consequence of the amino acid substitution. The measurement of one, or a
combination, of these criteria is used in various in-silico algorithms that assess the predicted
impact of a missense change. Several efforts have evaluated the performance of available
prediction software, to compare them to each other and to assess their ability to predict
“known” disease-causing variants.14–17 In general, most algorithms for missense variant
prediction are 65–80% accurate when examining known disease variants.16 Most tools also
tend to have low specificity, resulting in over-prediction of missense changes as deleterious
and are not as reliable at predicting missense variants with a milder effect,18 Some of the
more commonly used in-silico tools for missense variant interpretation in clinical
laboratories include PolyPhen219, SIFT20 and MutationTaster21. A list of missense variant
prediction in-silico tools can be found in Table 2.

Author Manuscript

Multiple software programs have been developed to predict splicing as it relates to the
creation or loss of splice sites at the exonic or intronic level.22 In general, splice site
prediction tools have increased sensitivity (~90–100%) relative to specificity (~60–80%) in
predicting splice site abnormalities.23,24 A list of some of the commonly used in-silico tools
for splice site variant interpretation is provided in Table 2.
While many of the different software programs use different algorithms for their predictions,
they have similarities in their underlying basis; therefore, the combination of predictions
from different in-silico tools are considered as a single piece of evidence in sequence
interpretation as opposed to independent pieces of evidence. The use of multiple software
programs for sequence variant interpretation is also recommended because the different
Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

programs each have their own strengths and weaknesses depending on the algorithm and in
many cases performance can vary by the gene and protein sequence. However these are only
predictions, and their use in sequence variant interpretation should be used carefully. It is
not recommended that these predictions be used as the sole source of evidence to make a
clinical assertion.

Proposed Criteria for Interpretation of Sequence Variants

Author Manuscript

The following approach to evaluate evidence for a variant is intended for interpretation of
variants observed in patients with suspected inherited (primarily Mendelian) disorders in a
clinical diagnostic laboratory setting. It is not intended for the interpretation of somatic
variation, pharmacogenomic variants, or variants in genes associated with multigenic nonMendelian complex disorders. Care must be taken when applying these rules to candidate
genes (“genes of uncertain significance”, GUS) in the context of exome or genome studies
(see Special Considerations section below) as this guidance is not intended to fulfill the
needs of the research community in its effort to identify new genes in disease.

Author Manuscript

Although these approaches can be used for evaluating variants found in healthy individuals
or secondary to the indication for testing, further caution must be employed as noted in
several parts of the guideline given the low prior likelihood that most variants unrelated to
the indication are pathogenic. While we expect that in general these guidelines will apply for
variant classification regardless of whether the variant was identified through analysis of a
single gene, gene panel, exome, genome or transcriptome, it is important to consider the
differences between implicating a variant as pathogenic (i.e. causative) for a disease, and a
variant that may be predicted to be disruptive/damaging to the protein for which it codes, but
is not necessarily implicated in a disease. These rules are intended to determine whether a
variant in a gene with a definitive role in a Mendelian disorder may be pathogenic for that
disorder. Pathogenicity determination should be independent of interpreting the cause of
disease in a given patient. For example, a variant should not be reported as pathogenic in
one case and not pathogenic in another simply because the variant is not thought to explain
disease in a given case. Pathogenicity should be determined by the entire body of evidence
in aggregate, including all cases studied, and arriving at a single conclusion.

Author Manuscript

This classification approach may be somewhat more stringent than laboratories have applied
to date. Possibly they will result in a larger proportion of variants being categorized as
uncertain significance. It is hoped that this approach will reduce the substantial number of
variants being reported as “causative” of disease without having sufficient supporting
evidence for that classification. It is important to keep in mind that when the clinical
laboratory reports a variant as pathogenic, the healthcare providers are highly likely to take
that as “actionable” and to alter the treatment or surveillance of a patient25 or remove such
management in a genotype-negative family member, based on that determination (see
discussion of “How healthcare providers should use this guideline” below).
We have provided two sets of criteria: one for classification of Pathogenic or Likely
Pathogenic variants (Table 3), and one for classification of Benign or Likely Benign variants
(Table 4). Each pathogenic criterion is weighted as very strong (PVS1), strong (PS1–4);

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

moderate (PM1–6), or supporting (PP1–5) and each benign criterion is weighted as standalone (BA1), strong (BS1–4) or supporting (BP1–6). The numbering within each category
does not convey any differences of weight and are merely labeled to help in referring to the
different criteria. For a given variant the user selects the criteria based on the evidence
observed for the variant. The criteria are then combined according to the scoring rules in
Table 5 to choose a classification from the 5 tier system. The rules apply to all available data
on a variant, whether gathered on the current case under investigation, or on well-vetted
previously published data. Unpublished case data may also be obtained through public
resources (e.g. ClinVar or locus specific databases) and from a laboratory's own database. In
order to provide critical flexibility to variant classification, some criteria listed as one weight
can be moved to another weight using professional judgment depending on the evidence
collected. For example, rule PM3 could be upgraded to strong if there were multiple
observations of detection of the variant in trans (on opposite chromosomes) with other
pathogenic variants (see section PM3 for further guidance). In contrast, in situations when
the data are not as strong as described, judgment can be used to consider the evidence as
fulfilling a lower level (e.g. see PS4, Note 2 in Table 3). If a variant does not fulfill criteria
using either of these sets (pathogenic or benign), or the evidence for benign and pathogenic
is conflicting, the variant defaults to Uncertain Significance. An additional figure is included
in the supplement that organizes the criteria by type and strength (see Figure 1). Please note,
expert judgment must be applied when evaluating the full body of evidence to account for
differences in the strength of variant evidence.
The following is provided to more thoroughly explain certain concepts noted in the criteria
for variant classification (Tables 3 and 4) and to provide examples and/or caveats or pitfalls
in their use. This section should be read in concert with Tables 3 and 4.

Author Manuscript

PVS1 Null variants
Certain types of variants (e.g. nonsense, frameshift, canonical +/−1 or 2 splice sites,
initiation codon, single exon or multi-exon deletion) can often be assumed to disrupt gene
function by leading to complete absence of the gene product by lack of transcription or
nonsense-mediated decay of an altered transcript. However, one must exercise caution in
classifying these variants as pathogenic by considering the following principles:

Author Manuscript

A. When classifying such variants as pathogenic, one must ensure that null variants
are a known mechanism of pathogenicity consistent with the established
inheritance pattern for the disease. For example, there are genes for which only
heterozygous missense variants cause disease and null variants are benign in a
heterozygous state (e.g. many hypertrophic cardiomyopathy genes). A novel
heterozygous nonsense variant in the MYH7 gene would not be considered
pathogenic for dominant hypertrophic cardiomyopathy based solely on this
evidence whereas a novel heterozygous nonsense variant in the CFTR gene would
likely be considered a recessive pathogenic variant.
B. One must also be cautious when interpreting truncating variants downstream of the
most 3’ truncating variant established as pathogenic in the literature. This is
especially true if the variant occurs in the last exon or in the last 50 bps of the

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

penultimate exon such that nonsense-mediated decay26 would not be predicted and
there is a higher likelihood of an expressed protein. However, the length of the
predicted truncated protein would also factor into the pathogenicity assignment and
such variants cannot be interpreted without a functional assay.
C. For splice site variants, the variant may lead to exon skipping, shortening or
inclusion of intronic material, due to alternative donor/acceptor site usage or
creation of new sites. Although splice site variants are predicted to lead to a null
effect, confirmation of impact requires functional analysis by either RNA or protein
analysis. One must also consider the possibility of an in-frame deletion/insertion
which could retain the critical domains of the protein, and hence lead to either a
mild or neutral effect with a minor length change (PM4) or a gain-of-function
effect.

Author Manuscript

D. It is important to consider the presence of alternate gene transcripts and understand
which are biologically relevant, and in which tissues the products are expressed. If
a truncating variant is confined to only one or not all transcripts, one must be
cautious about over-interpreting variant impact given the presence of the other
protein isoforms.
E. One must also be cautious in assuming that a null variant will lead to disease if
found in an exon where no other pathogenic variants have been described given the
possibility that the exon may be alternatively spliced. This is particularly true if the
predicted truncating variant is identified as an incidental finding (unrelated to the
indication for testing) given the low prior likelihood of finding a pathogenic variant
in that setting.

Author Manuscript

PS1 Same amino acid change
In most cases, when one missense variant is known to be pathogenic, a different nucleotide
change that results in the same amino acid [e.g. c.34G>C (p.Val12Leu) and c.34G>T
(p.Val12Leu)] can also be assumed to be pathogenic, particularly if the mechanism of
pathogenicity is through altered protein function. However, it is important to assess the
possibility that the variant may act directly through the specific DNA change (e.g. through
splicing disruption as assessed through at least computational analysis) instead of through
the amino acid change, in which case the assumption of pathogenicity may no longer be
valid.
PS2 PM6 De novo variants

Author Manuscript

A variant observed to have arisen de novo (parental samples test negative), is considered
strong support for pathogenicity if the following conditions are met:
A. Both parental samples were shown through identity testing to be the biological
parents of the patient. Note: PM6 applies if identity is assumed but not confirmed.
B. The patient has a family history of disease that is consistent with de novo
inheritance (e.g. unaffected parents for a dominant disorder). However, it is
possible that more than one sibling may be affected due to germline mosaicism.

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

C. The phenotype in the patient matches the gene’s disease association with
reasonable specificity. For example, this argument is strong for a patient with a de
novo variant in the NIPBL gene who has distinctive facial features, hirsutism and
upper limb defects (i.e. Cornelia de Lange syndrome) whereas it would be weaker
for a de novo variant found in exome sequencing in a child with non-specific
features such as developmental delay.
PS3 BS3 Functional studies

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Functional studies can be a powerful tool in support of pathogenicity; however, not all
functional studies are effective in predicting an impact on a gene or protein function. For
example, certain enzymatic assays offer well-established approaches to assess the impact of
a missense variant on enzymatic function in a metabolic pathway (e.g. α-galactosidase
enzyme function). On the other hand, some functional assays may be less consistent
predictors of the effect of variants on protein function. To assess the validity of a functional
assay, one must consider how closely the functional assay reflects the biological
environment. For example, assaying enzymatic function directly from biopsied tissue from
the patient or an animal model provides stronger evidence than expressing the protein in
vitro. Likewise, evidence is stronger if the assay reflects the full biological function of the
protein (e.g. substrate breakdown by an enzyme) as compared to one component of function
(e.g. ATP hydrolysis for a protein with additional binding properties). Validation,
reproducibility and robustness data that assess the analytical performance of the assay and
account for specimen integrity, which can be affected by the method and time of acquisition,
as well as storage and transport, are important factors to consider. These factors are
mitigated in the case of an assay in a CLIA laboratory developed test or commercially
available kit. Assays that assess the impact of variants at the mRNA level can be highly
informative when evaluating the effects of variants at splice junctions and within coding
sequences, untranslated regions, as well as deeper intronic regions (e.g. mRNA stability,
processing or translation). Technical approaches include direct analysis of RNA and/or
cDNA derivatives and in vitro minigene splicing assays.
PS4 PM2 BA1 BS1 BS2 Variant Frequency and Use of Control Populations

Author Manuscript

Assessing the frequency of a variant in a control or general population is useful in assessing
its potential pathogenicity. This can be accomplished by searching publicly available
population databases (e.g. 1000 Genomes, NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project (ESP) Exome
Variant Server, Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC); see Table 1) as well as using racematched control data that are often published in the literature. The ESP dataset is useful for
Caucasian and African American populations and has coverage data to determine if a variant
is absent. Although the 1000 Genomes data cannot be used to assess the absence of a
variant, it has a broader representation of different racial populations. More recently ExAC
released allele frequency data from >60,000 exomes from a diverse set of populations which
includes approximately two-thirds of the ESP data. In general, an allele frequency in a
control population that is greater than expected for the disorder (Table 6) is considered
strong support for a benign interpretation for a rare Mendelian disorder (BS1) or if over 5%
then it is considered as stand-alone support (BA1). Furthermore, if the disease under
investigation is fully penetrant at an early age and the variant is observed in a wellGenet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

documented healthy adult individual for a recessive (homozygous), dominant
(heterozygous), or X-linked (hemizygous) condition then this is considered strong evidence
for a benign interpretation (BS2). If the variant is absent, one should confirm that the read
depth in the database is sufficient for an accurate call at the variant site. If a variant is absent
from (or below the expected carrier frequency if recessive) a large general population or a
control cohort (>1000 individuals) and the population is race-matched to the patient
harboring the identified variant, then this observation can be considered a moderate piece of
evidence for pathogenicity (PM2). However, many benign variants are "private," (unique to
individuals or families) and therefore absence in a race-matched population is not
considered sufficient or even strong evidence for pathogenicity.

Author Manuscript

The use of population data for case-control comparisons is most useful when the populations
are well-phenotyped, have large frequency differences and the Mendelian disease under
study is early-onset. Patients referred to a clinical laboratory for testing are likely to include
individuals sent to “rule-out” a disorder, and thus may not qualify as well-phenotyped cases.
When using a general population as a control cohort, the presence of individuals with
subclinical disease is always a possibility. However, in both of these scenarios, a case
control comparison will be underpowered with respect to detecting a difference and as such,
showing a statistically significant difference can still be assumed to provide supportive
evidence for pathogenicity as noted above. In contrast, the absence of a statistical difference,
particularly with extremely rare variants and less penetrant phenotypes, should be
interpreted cautiously.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Odds Ratios (OR) or Relative Risk (RR) is a measure of association between a genotype (i.e.
the variant is present in the genome) and a phenotype (i.e. affected with the disease/
outcome) and can be used for either Mendelian diseases or complex traits. In this guideline
we are only addressing its use in Mendelian disease. While RR is different from OR, RR
asymptotically approaches OR for small probabilities. OR of 1.0 means that the variant does
not affect the odds of having the disease, values above 1.0 mean there is an association
between the variant and the risk of disease, and those below 1.0 mean there is a negative
association between the variant and the risk of disease. In general, variants with a modest
Mendelian effect size will have an OR of 3 or greater, while highly penetrant variants will
have very high ORs (example: APOE E4/E4 homozygotes compared to E3/E3 homozygotes
have an OR of 13 (www.tgen.org/data/neurogenomics). However, the confidence interval
(CI) around the OR is as important as the measure of association itself. If the CI includes 1.0
(e.g. OR= 2.5, CI = 0.9–7.4), there is little confidence in the assertion of association. In the
above APOE example the CI was approximately 10–16. Very simple OR calculators are
available on the web (e.g. http://www.hutchon.net/ConfidOR.htm and http://
easycalculation.com/statistics/odds-ratio.php).27,28
PM1 Mutational hot spot and/or critical and well-established functional domain
Certain protein domains are known to be critical to protein function and all missense
variants identified to date in these domains have been shown to be pathogenic. These
domains must also lack benign variants. In addition, mutational hotspots in less well
characterized regions of genes are reported in which pathogenic variants in one or several

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

nearby residues have been observed with greater frequency. Either evidence can be
considered moderate evidence of pathogenicity.
PM3 BP2 Cis/trans testing

Author Manuscript

Testing parental samples to determine whether the variant occurs in cis (the same copy of
the gene) or in trans (different copies of the gene) can be important for assessing
pathogenicity. For example, when two heterozygous variants are identified in a gene for a
recessive disorder, if one variant is known to be pathogenic, then determining that the other
variant is in trans can be considered moderate evidence for pathogenicity of the latter
variant (PM3). In addition, this evidence could be upgraded to strong if there are multiple
observations of the variant in trans with other pathogenic variants. However, if the variant is
present in the general population, a statistical approach would be needed to control for
random co-occurrence. In contrast, finding the second variant in cis would be supporting
evidence, though not definitive, for a benign role (BP2). In the case of uncertain
pathogenicity of two heterozygous variants identified in a recessive gene, then the
determination of the cis versus trans nature of the variants does not necessarily provide
additional information with regard to pathogenicity of either variant. However, the
likelihood that both copies of the gene are impacted is reduced if the variants are found in
cis.
In the context of dominant disorders, the detection of a variant in trans with a pathogenic
variant can be considered supporting evidence for a benign impact (BP2) or in certain welldeveloped disease models, may even be considered stand-alone evidence as has been
validated for use in assessing CFTR variants.3

Author Manuscript

PM4 BP3 Protein length changes due to in-frame deletions/insertions and stop losses
The deletion or insertion of one or more amino acids as well as the extension of a protein by
changing the stop codon to an amino acid codon (e.g. a stop loss variant) is more likely to
disrupt protein function as compared to a missense change alone due to length changes in
the protein. Therefore, in-frame deletions/insertions and stop losses are considered moderate
evidence of pathogenicity. The larger the deletion, insertion or extension, and the more
conserved the amino acids are in a deleted region, then the more substantial is the evidence
to support pathogenicity. In contrast, small in-frame deletions/insertions in repetitive
regions, or regions that are not well conserved in evolution, are less likely to be pathogenic.
PM5 Novel missense at the same position

Author Manuscript

A novel missense amino acid change occurring at the same position as another pathogenic
missense change (e.g. Trp38Ser and Trp38Leu) is considered moderate evidence but cannot
be assumed to be pathogenic. This is especially true if the novel change is more conservative
compared to the established pathogenic missense variant. Also, the different amino acid
change could lead to a different phenotype. For example, different substitutions of the
Lys650 residue of the FGFR3 gene are associated with a wide range of clinical phenotypes:
p.Lys650Gln or p.Lys650Asn causes mild hypochondroplasia, p.Lys650Met causes severe
achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans, and thanatophoric
dysplasia type 2, a lethal skeletal dysplasia, arises from p.Lys650Glu.
Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 15

PP1 BS4 Segregation analysis

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Care must be taken in using segregation of a variant in a family as evidence for
pathogenicity. In fact, segregation of a particular variant with a phenotype in a family is
evidence for linkage of the locus to the disorder, though not evidence of pathogenicity of the
variant itself. A statistical approach has been published29,30 with the caveat that the
identified variant may be in linkage disequilibrium with the true pathogenic variant in that
family. Statistical modeling takes into account age-related penetrance and phenocopy rates,
with advanced methods also incorporating in-silico predictions and co-occurrence with a
known pathogenic variant into a single quantitative measure of pathogenicity.31 Distant
relatives are important to include, because they are less likely to have both the disease and
the variant by chance than members within a nuclear family. Full gene sequencing
(including entire introns and 5’ and 3’ UTRs) may provide greater evidence that another
variant is not involved or identify additional variants to consider as possibly causative.
Unless the genetic locus is evaluated very carefully, one risks misclassifying a nonpathogenic variant as pathogenic.
When a specific variant in the target gene is observed to segregate with a phenotype or
disease in multiple affected family members and multiple families from diverse ethnic
backgrounds, linkage disequilibrium and ascertainment bias are less likely to confound the
evidence for pathogenicity. In this case, this criterion may be taken as Moderate or Strong
evidence, depending on the extent of segregation, rather than Supporting evidence.

Author Manuscript

On the other hand, lack of segregation of a variant with a phenotype provides strong
evidence against pathogenicity. Careful clinical evaluation is needed to rule out mild
symptoms of reportedly unaffected individuals as well as possible phenocopies (affected
individuals with disease due to a non-genetic or different genetic cause). Also biological
family relationships need to be confirmed to rule out adoption, non-paternity, sperm and egg
donation and other non-biological relationships. Decreased and age-dependent penetrance
also must be considered to ensure that asymptomatic family members are truly unaffected.
Statistical evaluation of co-segregation may be difficult in the clinical laboratory setting. If
appropriate families are identified, clinical laboratories are encouraged to work with experts
in statistical or population genetics to ensure proper modeling and to avoid incorrect
conclusions of the relevance of the variant to the disease.
PP2 BP1 Variant spectrum

Author Manuscript

Many genes have a defined spectrum of pathogenic and benign variation. For genes in which
missense variation is a common cause of disease and there is very little benign variation
observed in the gene, a novel missense variant can be considered supporting evidence for
pathogenicity (PP2). In contrast, for genes in which truncating variants are the only known
mechanism of variant pathogenicity, missense variants can be considered supporting
evidence for a benign impact in these genes (BP1). For example, truncating variants in
ASPM are the primary type of pathogenic variant in this gene that causes autosomal
recessive primary microcephaly and the gene has a high rate of missense polymorphic

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript

variants. Therefore missense variants in ASPM can be considered to have this line of
supporting evidence for a benign impact.
PP3 BP4 Computational (in silico) data

Author Manuscript

It is important not to overestimate computational evidence, particularly given that different
algorithms may rely on the same (or similar) data to support predictions and most algorithms
have not been validated against well-established pathogenic variants. In addition, the
algorithms can have vastly different predictive capabilities for different genes. If all of the in
silico programs tested agree on the prediction, then this evidence can be counted as
supporting. However, if in silico predictions disagree, then this evidence should not be used
in classifying a variant. The observation of the variant amino acid change being present in
multiple non-human mammalian species in an otherwise well-conserved region suggesting
the amino acid change would not compromise function can be considered strong evidence
for a benign interpretation. However, one must be cautious about assuming a benign impact
in a non-conserved region if the gene has recently evolved in humans (e.g. genes involved in
immune function).
PP4 Using phenotype to support variant claims

Author Manuscript

In general, the fact that a patient has a phenotype that matches the known spectrum of
clinical features for a gene, is not considered evidence for pathogenicity given that nearly all
patients tested in disease-targeted tests have the phenotype in question. However, if the
following criteria are met, the patient’s phenotype can be considered supporting evidence:
(1) the clinical sensitivity of testing is high with most patients testing positive for a
pathogenic variant in that gene; (2) the patient has a well-defined syndrome with little
overlap with other clinical presentations (e.g. Gorlin syndrome including basal cell
carcinoma, palmoplantar pits, odontogenic keratocysts); (3) the gene is not subject to
substantial benign variation which can be determined through large general population
cohorts (e.g. ESP); and (4) family history is consistent with the mode of inheritance of the
disorder.
PP5 BP6 Reputable source

Author Manuscript

There are increasing examples where pathogenicity classifications from a reputable source
(e.g. clinical laboratory with long-standing expertise in the disease area) have been shared
into databases, yet the evidence that formed the basis for classification was not provided and
may not be easily obtainable. In this case, the classification, if recently submitted, can be
used as a single piece of supporting evidence. However, laboratories are encouraged to share
the basis for classification as well as communicate with submitters to enable the underlying
evidence to be evaluated and built upon. If the evidence is available, this criterion should not
be used and instead, the criteria relevant to the evidence should be used.
BP5 Alternate locus observations
When a variant is observed in a case with a clear alternate genetic cause of disease, this is
generally considered supporting evidence to classify the variant as benign. However, there
are exceptions. An individual can be a carrier of an unrelated pathogenic variant for a

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript

recessive disorder; therefore, this evidence is much stronger for supporting a likely benign
variant classification in a gene for a dominant disorder as compared to a gene for a recessive
disorder. In addition, there are disorders where having multiple variants can contribute to
more severe disease. For example, two variants, one pathogenic and one novel, are identified
in a patient with a severe presentation of a dominant disease. A parent also has mild disease.
In this case, one must consider the possibility that the novel variant could also be pathogenic
and contributing to the increased severity of disease in the proband. In this clinical scenario,
observing the novel variant as the second variant would not support a benign classification
of the novel variant (though it is also not considered support for a pathogenic classification
without further evidence). And finally, there are certain diseases where multigenic
inheritance is known to occur, such as Bardet-Beidel syndrome, in which case the additional
variant in the second locus may also be pathogenic but should be reported with caution.

Author Manuscript

BP7 Synonymous variants

Author Manuscript

There is increasing recognition that splicing defects, beyond disruption of the splice
consensus sequence, can be an important mechanism of pathogenicity, particularly for genes
in which loss-of-function is a common mechanism of disease. Therefore, one should be
cautious in assuming that a synonymous nucleotide change will have no effect. However, if
the nucleotide position is not conserved over evolution and splicing assessment algorithms
neither predict an impact to a splice consensus sequence nor the creation of a new alternate
splice consensus sequence, then a splicing impact is less likely. Therefore, if supported by
computational evidence (BP4), one can classify novel synonymous variants as Likely
Benign. However, if computational evidence suggests a possible impact to splicing, or there
is raised suspicion for an impact (e.g. the variant occurs in trans with a known pathogenic
variant in a gene for a recessive disorder) then the variant should be classified as uncertain
significance until a functional evaluation can provide a more definitive assessment of impact
or other evidence is provided to rule out a pathogenic role.

Reporting of Sequence Variants

Author Manuscript

Writing succinct yet informative clinical reports can be a challenge as the complexity of the
content grows from reporting variants in single genes to multi-gene panels to exomes and
genomes. Several guidance documents have been developed for reporting including full
sample reports in the ACMG clinical laboratory standards for next-generation sequencing
guidance.32–35 Clinical reports are the final product of laboratory testing and are often
integrated into the patient’s electronic health record. Therefore, effective reports are concise,
yet easy to understand. Reports should be written in clear language that avoids medical
genetics jargon or defines such terms when used. The report should contain all of the
essential elements of the test performed, including structured results, an interpretation,
references, methodology, and appropriate disclaimers. These essential elements of the report
are also emphasized by CLIA regulations and the CAP laboratory standards for next
generation sequencing clinical tests.36

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 18

Results

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The results section should list variants using HGVS nomenclature (see Nomenclature
section). Given the increasing number of variants found in genetic tests, presenting the
variants in tabular form with essential components may best convey the information. These
components include: nomenclature at both the nucleotide (genomic and cDNA) and protein
level, gene name, disease, inheritance, exon, zygosity and variant classification. Parental
origin may also be included if known. In addition, if specific variants are analyzed in a
genotyping test, the laboratory should specifically note the variants interrogated with their
full description and historical nomenclature if it exists. Furthermore, when reporting results
from exome or genome sequencing, or occasionally very large disease-targeted panels,
grouping variants into categories such as “Variants in Disease Genes with an Established
Association with the Reported Phenotype”, “Variants in Disease Genes with a Likely
Association with the Reported Phenotype” and (where appropriate) “Incidental (Secondary)
Findings” may be beneficial.
Interpretation

Author Manuscript

The interpretation should contain the evidence supporting the variant classification including
its predicted effect on the resultant protein and whether any variants identified are likely to
fully or partially explain the patient's indication for testing. The report should also include
any recommendations to the clinician for supplemental clinical testing such as enzymatic/
functional testing of the patient’s cells and variant testing of family members to further
inform variant interpretation. The interpretation section should address all variants described
in the results section but may contain additional information. It should be noted if the variant
has been reported previously in the literature or in disease or control databases. The
references, if any, that contributed to the classification should be cited where discussed and
listed at the end of the report. The additional information described in the interpretation
section may include a summarized conclusion of the results of in-silico analyses and
evolutionary conservation analyses. However, individual computational predictions (e.g.
scores or terms such as “damaging”, etc.) should be avoided given the high likelihood of
misinterpretation by health care providers who may be unfamiliar with the limitations of
predictive algorithms (see In Silico Predictive Programs section above). A discussion of
decreased penetrance and variable expressivity of the disorder, if relevant, should be
included in the final report.
Methodology

Author Manuscript

The methods and types of variants detected by the assay and those refractory to detection
should be provided on the report. Limitations of the assay used to detect the variants should
also be reported. Methods should include those used to obtain nucleic acids (e.g. PCR,
capture, whole genome amplification) as well as those to analyze the nucleic acids (e.g. bidirectional Sanger sequencing, next generation sequencing, chromosomal microarray,
genotyping technologies, etc.) as this may provide the healthcare provider with the
necessary information to decide if additional testing is required to follow up on the results.
The methodology section should also give the official gene names approved by the Human
Genome Organization Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC), RefSeq accession numbers

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript

for transcripts and genome build including versions. For large panels, gene level information
may be posted and referenced by URL. The laboratory may choose to add a disclaimer
which addresses general pitfalls in laboratory testing such as sample quality and sample mix
up.
Access to patient advocacy groups, clinical trials and research

Author Manuscript

Although specific clinical guidance for a patient is not recommended for laboratory reports,
provision of general information for categories of results (e.g. all positives) is appropriate
and helpful. A large number of patient advocacy groups and clinical trials are now available
for support and treatment of many diseases. Laboratories may choose to add this information
to the body of the report or attach the information so it is sent to the healthcare provider
along with the report. Laboratories may make an effort to connect the healthcare provider to
research groups working on specific diseases when a variant’s effect is classified as
“uncertain” as long as HIPAA patient privacy requirements are followed.
Variant re-analysis
As evidence on variants evolves, previous classifications may later require modification. For
example, the availability of large population variant frequency data has led many “uncertain
significance” variants to be re-classified as benign, and testing additional family members
may result in the re-classification of variants.

Author Manuscript

As the content of sequencing tests expands and the number of variants identified grows,
expanding to thousands and millions of variants from exome and genome sequencing, the
ability for laboratories to update reports as variant knowledge changes will be untenable
without appropriate mechanisms and resources to sustain those updates. In order to set
appropriate expectations with healthcare providers and patients, laboratories should provide
clear policies on the reanalysis of data from genetic testing and whether additional charges
may apply for reanalysis. Laboratories are encouraged to explore innovative approaches to
give patients and providers more efficient access to updated information.37,38
For reports containing VUSs in genes related to the primary indication and in the absence of
updates that may be proactively provided by the laboratory, it is recommended that
laboratories suggest periodic inquiry by healthcare providers to determine if knowledge has
changed on any VUSs including variants reported as “Likely Pathogenic”. In contrast,
laboratories are encouraged to consider proactive amendment of cases when a variant
reported with a near definitive classification (Pathogenic or Benign) must be reclassified.
Please see ACMG guidelines on duty to re-contact regarding physician responsibility.39

Author Manuscript

Confirmation of findings
Recommendations for the confirmation of reported variants is addressed elsewhere.35,36
Except as noted, confirmation studies using an orthogonal method are recommended for all
sequence variants that are considered to be pathogenic or likely pathogenic for a Mendelian
disorder. These methods may include, but are not limited to: re-extraction of the sample and
testing, testing of parents, restriction enzyme digestion, sequencing the area of interest a
second time or using an alternate genotyping technology.

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript

Special Considerations
Evaluating and Reporting Variants in Genes of Uncertain Significance (GUS) based on the
Indication for Testing

Author Manuscript

Genome and exome sequencing are identifying new genotype-phenotype connections. When
the laboratory finds a variant in a gene without a validated association to the patient's
phenotype, this is a gene of uncertain significance (GUS). This can occur when a gene has
never been associated with any patient phenotype or when the gene has been associated with
a different phenotype from that under consideration. Special care must be taken when
applying the recommended guidelines to a GUS. In such situations, utilizing variant
classification rules developed for recognized genotype-phenotype associations is not
appropriate. For example, when looking across the exome or genome, a de novo observation
is no longer strong evidence for pathogenicity given that all individuals are expected to have
approximately one de novo variant in their exome or 100 in their genome. Likewise,
thousands of variants across a genome could segregate with a significant LOD score.
Furthermore, many deleterious variants may be detected that are clearly disruptive to a gene
or its resultant protein (nonsense, frameshift, canonical +/−1,2 splice site, exon-level
deletion); however, this is insufficient evidence for a causative role in any given disease
presentation.

Author Manuscript

Variants found in a GUS may be considered as candidates and reported as ‘Variants in a
gene of uncertain significance’. These variants, if reported, should always be classified as
“Uncertain Significance”. Additional evidence would be required to support the gene’s
association to disease before any variant in the gene itself can be considered pathogenic for
that disease.5 For example, additional cases with matching rare phenotypes and deleterious
variants in the same gene would enable the individual variants to be classified according to
the recommendations presented here.
Evaluating Variants in Healthy Individuals or as Incidental Findings
Caution must be exercised when using these guidelines to evaluate variants in healthy or
asymptomatic individuals or to interpret incidental findings unrelated to the primary
indication for testing. In these cases, the likelihood of any identified variant being
pathogenic may be far less than when performing disease-targeted testing. As such, the
required evidence to call a variant pathogenic should be higher and extra caution should be
exercised. In addition, the predicted penetrance of pathogenic variants found in the absence
of a phenotype or family history may be far less than predicted based upon historical data
from patients ascertained with disease.

Author Manuscript

Mitochondrial variants
The interpretation of mitochondrial variants other than well-established pathogenic variants
is complex and remains challenging and has several special considerations which are
addressed here.
The nomenclature differs from standard nomenclature for nuclear genes, using gene name
and m. numbering (e.g. m.8993T>C) and p. numbering, but not the standard c. numbering

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript

(see also nomenclature). The current accepted reference sequence is the Revised Cambridge
Reference Sequence (rCRS) of the Human Mitochondrial DNA: GenBank sequence
NC_012920 gi:251831106.40,41

Author Manuscript

Heteroplasmy or homoplasmy should be reported along with an estimate of heteroplasmy of
the variant if the test has been validated to determine heteroplasmy levels. Heteroplasmy
percentages may vary in different tissue types from the sample tested; therefore, interpreting
low heteroplasmic levels also must be done in the context of the tissue tested, and may be
meaningful only in the affected tissue such as muscle. Over 275 mtDNA variants relating to
disease have been recorded (http://mitomap.org/bin/view.pl/MITOMAP/WebHome).42
MitoMap is considered the main source of information related to mitochondrial variants as
well as haplotypes. Other resources, such as frequency information (http://
www.mtdb.igp.uu.se/),43 secondary structures, sequences, and alignment of mitochondrial
tRNAs (http://mamit-trna.u-strasbg.fr/),44 mitochondrial haplogroups (http://
www.phylotree.org/)45and other information (http://www.mtdnacommunity.org/
default.aspx),46 may prove useful in interpreting mitochondrial variants.

Author Manuscript

Given the difficulty in assessing mitochondrial variants, a separate evidence checklist has
not been included. However, any evidence needs to be applied with additional caution (for
review, see Wong, 2007).47 The genes in the mitochondrial genome encode for tRNA as
well as for protein; therefore, evaluating amino acid changes is only relevant for genes
encoding proteins. Similarly, since many mitochondrial variants are missense variants,
evidence criteria for truncating variants will likely not be helpful. Because truncating
variants do not fit the known variant spectrum in most mitochondrial genes, their
significance may be uncertain. Although mitochondrial variants are typically maternally
inherited, they can be sporadic, yet de novo variants are difficult to assess due to
heteroplasmy that may be below an assay’s detection level, or different between tissues. The
level of heteroplasmy may contribute to the variable expression and reduced penetrance seen
within families. Nevertheless there still remains a lack of correlation between the percent
heteroplasmy and disease severity.47 Muscle, liver or urine may be additional specimen
types useful for clinical evaluation. Undetected heteroplasmy may also affect outcomes of
case, case/control, and familial concordance studies. In addition, functional studies are not
readily available, although evaluating muscle morphology may be helpful (i.e. presence of
ragged red fibers). Frequency data and published studies demonstrating causality may often
be the only assessable criteria on the checklist. An additional tool for mitochondrial diseases
may be haplogroup analysis, but may not represent a routine method that clinical
laboratories have employed and the clinical correlation is not easy to interpret.

Author Manuscript

Consideration should be given to testing nuclear genes associated with mitochondrial
disorders, as variants in nuclear genes could be causative of oxidative disorders or
modulating the mitochondrial variants.
Pharmacogenomics
Establishing the effects of variants in genes involved with drug metabolism is challenging,
in part because a phenotype is only apparent upon exposure to a drug. Still, variants in genes
related to drug efficacy and risk for adverse events have been described and are increasingly
Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript

used in clinical care. Gene summaries and clinically relevant variants can be found at the
Pharmacogenomics Knowledge Base (PharmGKB; http://www.pharmgkb.org/).48 Alleles
and nomenclature for the cytochrome P450 gene family is available at http://
www.cypalleles.ki.se/.49 Although the interpretation of pharmacogenomic (PGx) variants is
beyond the scope of this document, we include a discussion of the challenges and
distinctions associated with the interpretation and reporting of PGx results.
The traditional nomenclature of PGx alleles uses star (*) alleles, which often represent
haplotypes, or a combination of variants on the same allele. Traditional nucleotide
numbering using outdated reference sequences is still in practice. Converting traditional
nomenclature to standardized nomenclature using current reference sequences is an arduous
task, but is necessary for informatics applications with next generation sequencing.

Author Manuscript

Many types of variants have been identified in PGx genes, such as truncating, missense,
deletions, duplications (of functional as well as non-functional alleles) and gene
conversions, resulting in functional, partially functional (decreased or reduced function) and
non-functional (null) alleles. Interpreting sequence variants often requires haplotype
determination from a combination of variants detected. Haplotypes are typically presumed
based on population frequencies and known variant associations rather than testing directly
for chromosomal phase (molecular haplotyping).

Author Manuscript

In addition, for many PGx genes (particularly variants in genes coding for enzymes) the
overall phenotype is derived from a diplotype, which is the combination of variants or
haplotypes on both alleles. Because PGx variants do not directly cause disease, it may be
more appropriate to use terms related to metabolism (rapid, intermediate, poor), efficacy
(resistant, responsive, sensitive) or “risk”, rather than pathogenic. Further nomenclature and
interpretation guidelines are needed to establish consistency in this field.
Common Complex Disorders
Unlike Mendelian diseases, the identification of common, complex disease genes, such as
those contributing to type 2 diabetes, coronary artery disease, and hypertension has largely
relied on population-based approaches (e.g. genome wide association studies or GWAS)
rather than family-based studies.50,51 Currently, numerous GWAS reports have resulted in
the cataloguing of over 1200 risk alleles for common, complex diseases and traits. However,
most of these variants are in non-genic regions and additional studies will be required to
determine if any of the variants are directly causal through effects on regulatory elements,
for example, or are in linkage disequilibrium with causal variants.52

Author Manuscript

Common, complex risk alleles typically confer low relative risk and are meager in their
predictive power.53 To date, the utility of common, complex risk allele testing for patient
care54 has been unclear and models to combine multiple markers into a cumulative risk
score are often flawed and are usually no better than traditional risk factors such as family
history, demographics and non-genetic clinical phenotypes.55,56 Moreover, in almost all of
the common diseases, the risk alleles can only explain up to 10% of the variance in the
population even when the disease has high heritability. Given the complexity of issues, this
recommendation does not address the interpretation and reporting of complex trait alleles.

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript

However, we recognize that some of these alleles are identified during the course of
sequencing Mendelian genes and therefore guidance on how to report such alleles when
found incidentally is needed. The terms “pathogenic”, and “likely pathogenic” are not
appropriate in this context even when the association is statistically valid. An interim
solution, until better guidance is developed, is to report these variants as “risk alleles” or
under a separate "other reportable" category in the diagnostic report. The evidence for the
risk, as identified in the case-control/GWAS studies can be expressed by modifying the
terms such as “established risk allele”, “likely risk allele”, or “uncertain risk allele”, if
desired.
Somatic Variants

Author Manuscript

The description of somatic variants, primarily those observed in cancer cells, includes
complexities not encountered with constitutional variants, because the allele ratios are
highly variable and tumor heterogeneity can cause sampling differences. Interpretation helps
select therapy, predicts treatment response or prognosis of overall survival or tumor
progression free survival, further complicating variant classification. For the interpretation
of negative results, understanding the limit of detection of the sequencing assay (at what
allele frequency can the variant be detected by the assay) is important, and requires specific
knowledge of the tumor content of the sample. Variant classification categories are also
different with somatic variants as compared to germline, with terms such as “responsive”,
“resistant”, “driver”, and “passenger” often used. Confirmation of whether a variant is truly
somatic is done by sequence analysis of the patient’s germline DNA. A different set of
interpretation guidelines is needed for somatic variants, with tumor-specific databases used
for reference in addition to databases used for constitutional findings. To address this, a
workgroup has recently been formed by the Association for Molecular Pathology.

Author Manuscript

How should healthcare providers use these guidelines and
recommendations?
The primary purpose of clinical laboratory testing is to support medical decision-making. In
the clinic, genetic testing is generally used to identify or confirm the cause of disease and to
help the healthcare provider make individualized treatment decisions including the choice of
medication. Due to the complexity of genetic testing, optimal results are best realized when
the referring healthcare provider and the clinical laboratory work collaboratively in the
testing process.

Author Manuscript

When a healthcare provider orders genetic testing, the patient’s clinical information is
integral to the laboratory’s analysis. As healthcare providers increasingly utilize genomic
sequencing (exome or genome), the need for detailed clinical information to aid in
interpretation assumes increasing importance. For example, when a laboratory finds a rare or
novel variant in a genomic sequencing sample, the director cannot assume it is relevant to a
patient just because it is rare, novel or de novo. The laboratory must evaluate the variant and
the gene in the context of the patient's and family's history, physical examinations and
previous laboratory tests in order to distinguish between variants that cause the patient's
disorder and those that are incidental (secondary) findings or benign. Indeed, accurate and

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript

complete clinical information is so essential for the interpretation of genome-level DNA
sequence findings that the laboratory can reasonably refuse to proceed with the testing if
such information is not provided with the test sample.

Author Manuscript

For tests that cover a broad range of phenotypes (large panels, exome and genome
sequencing) the laboratory may find candidate causative variants. Further follow-up with the
healthcare provider and patient may uncover additional evidence to support a variant. These
additional phenotypes may be subclinical requiring additional clinical evaluation to detect
(e.g. temporal bone abnormalities detected by CT in a hearing impaired patient with an
uncertain variant in SLC26A4, the gene associated with Pendred syndrome). Additionally, it
is valuable to test other family members to establish when a variant is de novo, when a
variant co-segregates with disease in the family and when a variant is in trans with a
pathogenic variant in the same recessive disease-causing gene. It is possible to filter out or
discount the vast majority of variants for dominant diseases when they can be observed in
healthy relatives, making the interpretation much more efficient and conclusive. To this end,
it is strongly recommended that every effort be made to include parental samples along with
that of the proband, so-called “trio” testing (mother, father, affected child) in the setting of
exome and genome sequencing, particularly for suspected recessive or de novo causes.
Obviously this will be easier to achieve for pediatric patients than for affected adults. In the
absence of one or both parents, the inclusion of affected and unaffected siblings can be of
value.

Author Manuscript

Many genetic variants can result in a range of phenotypic expression (variable expressivity)
and the chance of disease developing may not be 100% (reduced penetrance), further
underscoring the importance of providing comprehensive clinical data to the clinical
laboratory to aid in variant interpretation. Ideally, it is recommended that clinical data be
deposited into, and shared via, centralized repositories as allowable by HIPAA and
Institutional Review Board regulations. Importantly, referring healthcare providers can
further assist clinical laboratories by recruiting DNA from family members in scenarios
where their participation will be required to interpret results, (e.g., in evaluating cosegregation with disease using affected family members, genotyping parents to assess for de
novo occurrence and determining the phase of variants in recessive disorders using first
degree relatives).

Author Manuscript

A key issue for healthcare providers is how to use the evidence provided by genetic testing
in medical management decisions. Variant analysis is at present imperfect and the variant
category reported does not imply 100% certainty. In general a variant classified as
pathogenic using the proposed classification scheme has met criteria informed by empirical
data such that a healthcare provider can use the molecular testing information in clinical
decision making. Efforts should be made to avoid using this as the sole evidence of
Mendelian disease; it should be used in conjunction with other clinical information when
possible. Typically, a variant classified as “likely pathogenic” has sufficient evidence that a
healthcare provider can use the molecular testing information in clinical decision making
when combined with other evidence of the disease in question. For example, in the prenatal
setting an ultrasound may show a key confirmatory finding or in postnatal cases, other data
such as enzyme assays, physical findings, or imaging studies may conclusively support
Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript

decision-making. However, it is recommended that all possible follow-up testing, as
described above, be pursued in order to generate additional evidence related to a “likely
pathogenic” variant as this may permit the variant to be reclassified as “pathogenic”. A
variant of uncertain significance (VUS) should not be used in clinical decision-making.
Efforts to resolve the classification of the variant to “pathogenic” or “benign” should be
undertaken. While this effort to reclassify the variant is underway, additional monitoring of
the patient for the disorder in question may be prudent. A variant termed likely benign has
sufficient evidence that a healthcare provider can conclude that it is not the cause of the
patient’s disorder when combined with other information, for example, if the variant does
not segregate in an affected family member and complex inheritance patterns are unlikely. A
variant termed benign has sufficient evidence that a healthcare provider can conclude that it
is not the cause of the patient’s disorder.

Author Manuscript

How the genetic testing evidence is used is also dependent on the clinical context and
indication for testing. In a prenatal diagnostic case where a family is considering irrevocable
decisions such as fetal treatment or pregnancy termination, the weight of evidence from the
report and other sources such as fetal ultrasound needs to be considered before action is
taken. When a genetic test result is the only evidence in a prenatal setting, variants termed
“likely pathogenic” must be explained carefully to families. It is therefore critical for
referring healthcare providers to communicate with the clinical laboratory to gain an
understanding of how variants are classified to assist in patient counseling and management.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgements
The workgroup wishes to thank our many colleagues in the genetics community who helped to develop this
‘consensus’ guideline through their responses to surveys, participation at workshops, insightful discussions, and
constructive comments. H. Rehm, S. Bale, S. Das, M. Hegde, and E. Lyon were supported in part by HG 006834.
H. Rehm was also supported in part by NIH grants HG006500 and HD077671.

References

Author Manuscript

1. Richards CS, Bale S, Bellissimo DB, et al. ACMG recommendations for standards for interpretation
and reporting of sequence variations: Revisions 2007. Genet Med. 2008; 10:294–300. [PubMed:
18414213]
2. Plon SE, Eccles DM, Easton D, et al. Sequence variant classification and reporting:
recommendations for improving the interpretation of cancer susceptibility genetic test results. Hum
Mutat. 2008; 29:1282–1291. [PubMed: 18951446]
3. Sosnay PR, Siklosi KR, Van Goor F, et al. Defining the disease liability of variants in the cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:1160–1167. [PubMed:
23974870]
4. Thompson BA, Spurdle AB, Plazzer J-P, et al. Application of a 5-tiered scheme for standardized
classification of 2,360 unique mismatch repair gene variants in the InSiGHT locus-specific
database. Nat Genet. 2014; 46:107–115. [PubMed: 24362816]
5. MacArthur DG, Manolio TA, Dimmock DP, et al. Guidelines for investigating causality of sequence
variants in human disease. Nature. 2014; 508:469–476. [PubMed: 24759409]

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

6. Kearney HM, Thorland EC, Brown KK, Quintero-Rivera F, South ST. American College of
Medical Genetics standards and guidelines for interpretation and reporting of postnatal
constitutional copy number variants. Genet Med. 2011; 13:680–685. [PubMed: 21681106]
7. Nomenclature for the description of sequence variants: Human Genome Variation Society. 2013
Available at https://www.hgvs.org/mutnomen.
8. Wildeman M, van Ophuizen E, den Dunnen JT, Taschner PE. Improving sequence variant
descriptions in mutation databases and literature using the Mutalyzer sequence variation
nomenclature checker. Hum Mutat. 2008; 29:6–13. [PubMed: 18000842]
9. [Accessed November 4, 2014] RefSeq: NCBI Reference Sequence Database. 2014. Available at
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/refseq
10. Locus Reference Genomic. 2011 Available at https://www.lrg-sequence.org.
11. [Accessed November 4, 2014] Concensus CDS Database NCBI. 2014. Available at https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CCDS/CcdsBrowse.cgi
12. Taschner PE, den Dunnen JT. Describing structural changes by extending HGVS sequence
variation nomenclature. Hum Mutat. 2011; 32:507–511. [PubMed: 21309030]
13. Kircher M, Witten DM, Jain P, O'Roak BJ, Cooper GM, Shendure J. A general framework for
estimating the relative pathogenicity of human genetic variants. Nat Genet. 2014; 46:310–315.
[PubMed: 24487276]
14. Hicks S, Wheeler DA, Plon SE, Kimmel M. Prediction of missense mutation functionality depends
on both the algorithm and sequence alignment employed. Hum Mutat. 2011; 32:661–668.
[PubMed: 21480434]
15. Tavtigian SV, Greenblatt MS, Lesueur F, Byrnes GB. In silico analysis of missense substitutions
using sequence-alignment based methods. Hum Mutat. 2008; 29:1327–1336. [PubMed: 18951440]
16. Thusberg J, Olatubosun A, Vihinen M. Performance of mutation pathogenicity prediction methods
on missense variants. Hum Mutat. 2011; 32:358–368. [PubMed: 21412949]
17. Thompson BA, Greenblatt MS, Vallee MP, et al. Calibration of multiple in silico tools for
predicting pathogenicity of mismatch repair gene missense substitutions. Hum Mutat. 2013;
34:255–265. [PubMed: 22949387]
18. Choi Y, Sims GE, Murphy S, Miller JR, Chan AP. Predicting the functional effect of amino acid
substitutions and indels. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e46688. [PubMed: 23056405]
19. Adzhubei IA, Schmidt S, Peshkin L, et al. A method and server for predicting damaging missense
mutations. Nat Methods. 2010; 7:248–249. [PubMed: 20354512]
20. Kumar P, Henikoff S, Ng PC. Predicting the effects of coding non-synonymous variants on protein
function using the SIFT algorithm. Nat Protoc. 2009; 4:1073–1081. [PubMed: 19561590]
21. Schwarz JM, Rodelsperger C, Schuelke M, Seelow D. MutationTaster evaluates disease-causing
potential of sequence alterations. Nat Methods. 2010; 7:575–576. [PubMed: 20676075]
22. Jian X, Boerwinkle E, Liu X. In silico tools for splicing defect prediction: a survey from the
viewpoint of end users. Genet Med. 2014; 16:497–503. [PubMed: 24263461]
23. Houdayer C, Caux-Montcoutier V, Krieger S, et al. Guidelines for splicing analysis in molecular
diagnosis derived from a set of 327 combined in silico/in vitro studies on BRCA1 and BRCA2
variants. Hum Mutat. 2012; 33:1228–1238. [PubMed: 22505045]
24. Vreeswijk MP, Kraan JN, van der Klift HM, et al. Intronic variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2 that
affect RNA splicing can be reliably selected by splice-site prediction programs. Hum Mutat. 2009;
30:107–114. [PubMed: 18693280]
25. Henderson LB, Applegate CD, Wohler E, Sheridan MB, Hoover-Fong J, Batista DA. The impact
of chromosomal microarray on clinical management: a retrospective analysis. Genet Med. 2014;
16:657–664. [PubMed: 24625444]
26. Popp MW, Maquat LE. Organizing principles of mammalian nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.
Annu Rev Genet. 2013; 47:139–165. [PubMed: 24274751]
27. Calculator for confidence intervals of odds ratio in an unmatched case control study. For example
groups of cases and controls studied to assess a treatment or exposure to a suspected causal factor.
2000 Available at http://www.hutchon.net/confidor.htm.

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

28. Odds Ratio Confidence Interval Calculator. Available at http://www.easycalculation.com/statistics/
odds-ratio.
29. Bayrak-Toydemir P, McDonald J, Mao R, et al. Likelihood ratios to assess genetic evidence for
clinical significance of uncertain variants: hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia as a model. Exp
Mol Pathol. 2008; 85:45–49. [PubMed: 18495117]
30. Thompson D, Easton DF, Goldgar DE. A full-likelihood method for the evaluation of causality of
sequence variants from family data. Am J Hum Genet. 2003; 73:652–655. [PubMed: 12900794]
31. Goldgar DE, Easton DF, Deffenbaugh AM, et al. Integrated evaluation of DNA sequence variants
of unknown clinical significance: application to BRCA1 and BRCA2. Am J Hum Genet. 2004;
75:535–544. [PubMed: 15290653]
32. Scheuner MT, Hilborne L, Brown J, Lubin IM. A report template for molecular genetic tests
designed to improve communication between the clinician and laboratory. Genet Test Mol
Biomarkers. 2012; 16:761–769. [PubMed: 22731646]
33. Lubin IM, Caggana M, Constantin C, et al. Ordering molecular genetic tests and reporting results:
practices in laboratory and clinical settings. J Mol Diagn. 2008; 10:459–468. [PubMed: 18669879]
34. Lubin IM, McGovern MM, Gibson Z, et al. Clinician perspectives about molecular genetic testing
for heritable conditions and development of a clinician-friendly laboratory report. J Mol Diagn.
2009; 11:162–171. [PubMed: 19197001]
35. Rehm HL, Bale SJ, Bayrak-Toydemir P, et al. ACMG clinical laboratory standards for nextgeneration sequencing. Genet Med. 2013; 15:733–747. [PubMed: 23887774]
36. Aziz N, Zhao Q, Bry L, et al. College of American Pathologists' Laboratory Standards for NextGeneration Sequencing Clinical Tests. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2014
37. Aronson SJ, Clark EH, Varugheese M, et al. Communicating new knowledge on previously
reported genetic variants. Genet Med. 2012
38. Bean LJ, Tinker SW, da Silva C, Hegde MR. Free the data: one laboratory's approach to
knowledge-based genomic variant classification and preparation for EMR integration of genomic
data. Hum Mutat. 2013; 34:1183–1188. [PubMed: 23757202]
39. Hirschhorn K, Fleischer LD, Godmilow L, et al. Duty to re-contact. Genet Med. 1999; 1:171–172.
[PubMed: 11258354]
40. Revised Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS) of the Human Mitochondrial DNA: GenBank
sequence NC_012920 gi:251831106.
41. Behar DM, Oven MV, Rosset S, et al. A "Copernican" reassessment of the human mitochondrial
DNA tree from its root. Am J Hum Genet. 2012; 90:675–684. [PubMed: 22482806]
42. MITOMAP: A human mitochondrial genome database. 2014 Available at http://mitomap.org/bin/
view.pl/MITOMAP/WebHome.
43. mt-DB- Human Mitochondrial Genome Database. 2007 Available at http://www.mtdb.igp.uu.se.
44. Compilation of mammalian mitochondrial tRNA genes. 2007 Available at http://mamit-trna.ustrasbg.fr/Summary.asp.
45. van Oven M, Kayser M. Updated comprehensive phylogenetic tree of global human mitochondrial
DNA variation. Hum Mutat. 2009; 30:E386–E394. http://www.phylotree.org. [PubMed:
18853457]
46. mtDNA Community. 2014 Available at http://www.mtdnacommunity.org/default.aspx/.
47. Wong LJ. Diagnostic challenges of mitochondrial DNA disorders. Mitochondrion. 2007; 7:45–52.
[PubMed: 17276740]
48. PharmGKB. 2014 Available at http://www.pharmgkb.org.
49. The Human Cytochrome P450 (CYP) Allele Nomenclature Database. Available at http://
www.cypalleles.ki.se/.
50. Manolio TA. Genomewide association studies and assessment of the risk of disease. N Engl J Med.
2010; 363:166–176. [PubMed: 20647212]
51. Hardy J, Singleton A. Genomewide association studies and human disease. N Engl J Med. 2009;
360:1759–1768. [PubMed: 19369657]
52. Kruglyak L. Prospects for whole-genome linkage disequilibrium mapping of common disease
genes. Nat Genet. 1999; 22:139–144. [PubMed: 10369254]

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript

53. McClellan J, King MC. Genetic heterogeneity in human disease. Cell. 2010; 141:210–217.
[PubMed: 20403315]
54. Topol EJ, Damani SB. The KIF6 collapse. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010; 56:1564–1566. [PubMed:
20888161]
55. Meigs JB, Shrader P, Sullivan LM, et al. Genotype score in addition to common risk factors for
prediction of type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008; 359:2208–2219. [PubMed: 19020323]
56. Paynter NP, Pare G, Buring JE, et al. Association between a literature-based genetic risk score and
cardiovascular events in women. JAMA. 2010; 303:631–637. [PubMed: 20159871]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Evidence Framework

The following chart organizes each of the criteria by the type of evidence as well as the
strength of the criteria for a benign (left side) or pathogenic (right side) assertion. Evidence
code descriptions can be found in Tables 3 and 4. Abbreviations: BS, benign strong; BP,
benign supporting; FH, family history; LOF, loss-of-function; MAF, minor allele frequency;
path., pathogenic; PM, pathogenic moderate; PP, pathogenic supporting; PS, pathogenic
strong; PVS, pathogenic very strong

Author Manuscript
Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 30

Table 1

Author Manuscript

Population, Disease-Specific, and Sequence Databases
Population Databases

Author Manuscript

Exome Aggregation Consortium
http://exac.broadinstitute.org/

Database of variants found during exome sequencing of
61,486 unrelated individuals sequenced as part of various
disease-specific and population genetic studies. Pediatric disease
subjects as well as related individuals were excluded.

Exome Variant Server
http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS

Database of variants found during exome sequencing of several
large cohorts of individuals of European and African American
ancestry. Includes coverage data to inform the absence of
variation.

1000 Genomes
http://browser.1000genomes.org

Database of variants found during low-coverage and highcoverage genomic and targeted sequencing from 26 populations.
Provides more diversity compared to EVS but also contains lower
quality data and some cohorts contain related individuals.

dbSNP
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp

Database of short genetic variations (typically 50 bp or less)
submitted from many sources. May lack details of originating
study and may contain pathogenic variants.

dbVar
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbvar

Database of structural variation (typically greater than 50 bp)
submitted from many sources.

Disease Databases

Author Manuscript

ClinVar
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar

Database of assertions about the clinical significance and
phenotype relationship of human variation.

OMIM
http://www.omim.org

Database of human genes and genetic conditions that also
contains a representative sampling of disease-associated genetic
variants.

Human Gene Mutation Database
http://www.hgmd.org

Database of variant annotations published in the literature.
Requires fee-based subscription for much of the content.

Locus/Disease/Ethnic/Other-Specific
Databases
http://www.hgvs.org/dblist/dblist.html
http://www.lovd.nl

The HGVS site developed a list of thousands of different
databases that provide variant annotations on specific subsets of
human variation. A large percentage of databases are built in the
LOVD system.

DECIPHER
http://decipher.sanger.ac.uk

A molecular cytogenetic database for clinicians and researchers
linking genomic microarray data with phenotype using the
Ensembl genome browser.

Sequence Databases
NCBI Genome
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome

Source of full human genome reference sequences.

RefSeqGene
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/refseq/rsg
and Locus Reference Genomic
(LRG)
http://www.lrg-sequence.org

Medically relevant gene reference sequence resource

MitoMap
http://www.mitomap.org/MITOMAP/HumanMitoSeq

Revised Cambridge reference sequence (rCRS) for the Human
Mitochondrial DNA

Author Manuscript
Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Author Manuscript

Splice site
prediction

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.
http://mendel.stanford.edu/SidowLab/downloads/MAPP/index.html
http://www.mutationtaster.org
http://mutpred.mutdb.org
http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2
http://provean.jcvi.org/index.php

http://snpanalyzer.uthsc.edu
http://bg.upf.edu/condel/home
http://cadd.gs.washington.edu

MAPP

MutationTaster

MutPred

PolyPhen-2

PROVEAN

nsSNPAnalyzer

Condel

CADD

http://www.umd.be/HSF

http://agvgd.iarc.fr/agvgd_input.php

Align GVGD

http://www.cbcb.umd.edu/software/GeneSplicer/gene_spl.shtml

http://snps-and-go.biocomp.unibo.it/snps-and-go

SNPs&GO

Human Splicing
Finder

http://sift.jcvi.org

SIFT

GeneSplicer

http://snps.biofold.org/phd-snp/phd-snp.html

http://mutationassessor.org

MutationAssessor

PhD-SNP

http://fathmm.biocompute.org.uk

FATHMM

http://www.pantherdb.org/tools/csnpScoreForm.jsp

http://consurftest.tau.ac.il

ConSurf

PANTHER

Website

Name

Author Manuscript

Missense
prediction

Position-dependent logic

Markov models

Contrasts annotations of fixed/nearly
fixed derived alleles in humans with
simulated variants

Combines SIFT, PolyPhen-2 and
MutationAssessor

Multiple sequence alignment and
protein structure analysis

Alignment and measurement of
similarity between variant sequence
and protein sequence homolog

Protein structure/function and
evolutionary conservation

Protein structure/function and
evolutionary conservation

Protein structure/function and
evolutionary conservation

Protein structure/function and
evolutionary conservation

Protein structure/function and
evolutionary conservation

Protein structure/function

Evolutionary conservation

Evolutionary conservation

Evolutionary conservation

Evolutionary conservation

Evolutionary conservation

Evolutionary conservation

Basis

Author Manuscript

In Silico Predictive Algorithms

Author Manuscript

Table 2
Richards et al.
Page 31

http://mendel.stanford.edu/sidowlab/downloads/gerp/index.html
http://compgen.bscb.cornell.edu/phast/
http://compgen.bscb.cornell.edu/phast/

PhyloP

http://www.softberry.com/berry.phtml?topic=fsplice&group=programs&subgroup=gfind

FSPLICE

PhastCons

http://www.fruitfly.org/seq_tools/splice.html

NNSplice

GERP

http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetGene2

NetGene2

In-silico tools/software prediction programs used for sequence variant interpretation

Nucleotide
conservation
prediction

http://genes.mit.edu/burgelab/maxent/Xmaxentscan_scoreseq.html

Author Manuscript

MaxEntScan

Author Manuscript
Website

Neural networks

Neural networks

Maximum entropy principle

Basis

Author Manuscript

Name

Author Manuscript

Missense
prediction

Richards et al.
Page 32

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 33

Table 3

Author Manuscript

Criteria for Classifying Pathogenic Variants
Very strong evidence of pathogenicity
PVS1

Null variant (nonsense, frameshift, canonical +/−1 or 2 splice sites, initiation
codon, single or multi-exon deletion) in a gene where loss of function (LOF)
is a known mechanism of disease
Caveats:
•

Beware of genes where LOF is not a known disease mechanism (e.g. GFAP, MYH7)

•

Use caution interpreting LOF variants at the extreme 3’ end of a gene

•

Use caution with splice variants that are predicted to lead to exon skipping but leave the remainder of the protein intact

•

Use caution in the presence of multiple transcripts

Strong evidence of pathogenicity
PS1

Author Manuscript

PS2

Same amino acid change as a previously established pathogenic variant
regardless of nucleotide change
Example:

Val->Leu caused by either G>C or G>T in the same codon

Caveat:

Beware of changes that impact splicing rather than at the
amino acid/protein level

De novo (both maternity and paternity confirmed) in a patient with the
disease and no family history
Note: Confirmation of paternity only is insufficient. Egg donation, surrogate
motherhood, errors in embryo transfer, etc. can contribute to nonmaternity

PS3

Well-established in vitro or in vivo functional studies supportive of a
damaging effect on the gene or gene product
Note: Functional studies that have been validated and shown to be
reproducible and robust in a clinical diagnostic laboratory setting are
considered the most well-established

PS4

The prevalence of the variant in affected individuals is significantly
increased compared to the prevalence in controls

Author Manuscript

Note 1: Relative risk (RR) or odds ratio (OR), as obtained from case-control
studies, is >5.0 and the confidence interval around the estimate of RR or OR
does not include 1.0. See manuscript for detailed guidance.
Note 2: In instances of very rare variants where case-control studies may
not reach statistical significance, the prior observation of the variant in
multiple unrelated patients with the same phenotype, and its absence in
controls, may be used as moderate level of evidence.
Moderate evidence of pathogenicity
PM1

Located in a mutational hot spot and/or critical and well-established
functional domain (e.g. active site of an enzyme) without benign variation

PM2

Absent from controls (or at extremely low frequency if recessive) (see Table 6)
in Exome Sequencing Project, 1000 Genomes or ExAC
Caveat: Population data for indels may be poorly called by next generation
sequencing

PM3

For recessive disorders, detected in trans with a pathogenic variant
Note: This requires testing of parents (or offspring) to determine phase

Author Manuscript

PM4

Protein length changes due to in-frame deletions/insertions in a non-repeat
region or stop-loss variants

PM5

Novel missense change at an amino acid residue where a different
missense change determined to be pathogenic has been seen before
Example: Arg156His is pathogenic; now you observe Arg156Cys
Caveat: Beware of changes that impact splicing rather than at the amino

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 34

acid/protein level
PM6

Assumed de novo, but without confirmation of paternity and maternity

Author Manuscript

Supporting evidence of pathogenicity
PP1

Co-segregation with disease in multiple affected family members in a gene
definitively known to cause the disease
Note: May be used as stronger evidence with increasing segregation data

PP2

Missense variant in a gene that has a low rate of benign missense variation
and where missense variants are a common mechanism of disease

PP3

Multiple lines of computational evidence support a deleterious effect on
the gene or gene product (conservation, evolutionary, splicing impact, etc)
Caveat: As many in silico algorithms use the same or very similar input for
their predictions, each algorithm should not be counted as an independent
criterion. PP3 can be used only once in any evaluation of a variant.

PP4

Patient’s phenotype or family history is highly specific for a disease with a
single genetic etiology

PP5

Reputable source recently reports variant as pathogenic but the evidence is
not available to the laboratory to perform an independent evaluation

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 35

Table 4

Author Manuscript

Criteria for Classifying Benign Variants
Stand-Alone evidence of benign impact
BA1

Allele frequency is above 5% in Exome Sequencing Project, 1000 Genomes,
or ExAC

Strong evidence of benign impact
BS1

Allele frequency is greater than expected for disorder (see table 6)

BS2

Observed in a healthy adult individual for a recessive (homozygous),
dominant (heterozygous), or X-linked (hemizygous) disorder with full
penetrance expected at an early age

BS3

Well-established in vitro or in vivo functional studies shows no damaging
effect on protein function or splicing

BS4

Lack of segregation in affected members of a family

Author Manuscript

Caveat: The presence of phenocopies for common phenotypes (i.e. cancer,
epilepsy) can mimic lack of segregation among affected individuals. Also,
families may have more than one pathogenic variant contributing to an
autosomal dominant disorder, further confounding an apparent lack of
segregation.
Supporting evidence of benign impact
BP1

Missense variant in a gene for which primarily truncating variants are
known to cause disease

BP2

Observed in trans with a pathogenic variant for a fully penetrant dominant
gene/disorder; or observed in cis with a pathogenic variant in any
inheritance pattern

BP3

In-frame deletions/insertions in a repetitive region without a known
function

BP4

Multiple lines of computational evidence suggest no impact on gene or
gene product (conservation, evolutionary, splicing impact, etc)
Caveat: As many in silico algorithms use the same or very similar input for
their predictions, each algorithm cannot be counted as an independent
criterion. BP4 can be used only once in any evaluation of a variant.

Author Manuscript

BP5

Variant found in a case with an alternate molecular basis for disease

BP6

Reputable source recently reports variant as benign but the evidence is not
available to the laboratory to perform an independent evaluation

BP7

A synonymous (silent) variant for which splicing prediction algorithms
predict no impact to the splice consensus sequence nor the creation of a
new splice site AND the nucleotide is not highly conserved

Author Manuscript
Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Richards et al.

Page 36

Table 5

Author Manuscript

Rules for Combining Criteria to Classify Sequence Variants
Pathogenic
1

1 Very Strong (PVS1) AND
a.

≥1 Strong (PS1–PS4) OR

b.

≥2 Moderate (PM1–PM6) OR

c.

1 Moderate (PM1–PM6) and 1 Supporting (PP1–PP5) OR

d.

≥2 Supporting (PP1–PP5)

2

≥2 Strong (PS1–PS4) OR

3

1 Strong (PS1–PS4) AND
a.

≥3 Moderate (PM1–PM6) OR

b.

2 Moderate (PM1–PM6) AND ≥2 Supporting (PP1–PP5) OR

c.

1 Moderate (PM1–PM6) AND ≥4 Supporting (PP1–PP5)

Author Manuscript

Likely Pathogenic
1

1 Very Strong (PVS1) AND 1 Moderate (PM1–PM6) OR

2

1 Strong (PS1–PS4) AND 1–2 Moderate (PM1–PM6) OR

3

1 Strong (PS1–PS4) AND ≥2 Supporting (PP1–PP5) OR

4

≥3 Moderate (PM1–PM6) OR

5

2 Moderate (PM1–PM6) AND ≥2 Supporting (PP1–PP5) OR

6

1 Moderate (PM1–PM6) AND ≥4 Supporting (PP1–PP5)

Benign
1

1 Stand-Alone (BA1) OR

2

≥2 Strong (BS1–BS4)

Author Manuscript

Likely Benign
1

1 Strong (BS1–BS4) and 1 Supporting (BP1–BP7) OR

2

≥2 Supporting (BP1–BP7)

*

Variants should be classified as Uncertain Significance if other criteria are unmet or the criteria for benign and pathogenic are contradictory.

Author Manuscript
Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Gene

CFTR

PAH

ACADM

PKHD1

Disease

Cystic fibrosis

Phenylketoneuria

MCADD

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

ARPKD

AR

AR

AR

AR

Inheritance

Not specific

Not specific

North European

Caucasian

Population

0.005%

0.006%

0.010%

0.031%

Incidence

1.4%

1.5%

2.0%

3.6%

Carrier
Frequency

p.K329E aka p.K304E

p.F508del

Common Mutation

0.200%
0.230%
1.270%

IVS20:c.1964+17G>T (Benign)
Ex61:c.10515C>A / p.S3505R
(Benign)
Ex66:c.11738G>A / p.R3913H
(Benign)

7.010%

5.170%

Ex9:c.963C>T / p.(=) (Benign)
Ex7:c.489T>G / p.(=) (Benign)

0.320%

IVS12:c.1316-35C>T (Benign)

0.700%

IVS6:c.743+40A>G (Benign)

13.550%

1.160%

5' UTR:c.-8G>C (Benign)

Ex12:c.1278T>C / p.(=)
(Benign)

15.090%

Ex23:c.3870A>G / p.(=)
(Benign)

0.360%

0.070%

Ex11:c.1523T>G / p.F508C
(Benign)

Ex12:c.1242C>T / p.(=)
(Benign)

n/a

ESP6500
AA MAF

Ex24:p.F508del (Pathogenic)

Variant Classification

0.000%

1.130%

0.810%

0.050%

0.000%

2.630%

0.090%

1.310%

5.190%

5.550%

2.970%

0.150%

n/a

ESP6500
EA MAF

0.430%

0.820%

0.610%

2.410%

1.750%

1.850%

4.650%

0.990%

3.670%

4.060%

7.070%

0.120%

n/a

ESP6500
All MAF

No

No

No

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

No

Partial

Partial

Partial

No

n/a

Concordance

AA MAF

Multiple publications

Multiple publications

AA MAF

AA MAF

EA MAF

AA MAF

PAH database

EA MAF

EA MAF

AA MAF

Kobayashi (1990)
Am J Hum Genet 47,
61

Multiple publications
(note variant not
available in EVS)

Evidence to support
classification

Assessment of variant frequency in the general population for curated variant classification. Variants in some common genetic disorders with their known
incidences for dominant (Kabuki syndrome and CHARGE syndrome), X linked diseases (Rett syndrome), and carrier frequencies for recessive disorders
(Cystic Fibrosis, Phenylketonuria (PKU), Medium Co-Acyl Dehydrogenase Deficiency (MCADD), Autosomal Recessive Polycystic Kidney Disease
(ARPKD), GJB2 associated hearing loss, and Hemochromatosis) are shown in the table. Some variants found in the ESP-GO database in these genes are
listed with the variant classifications based on evidence and concordance with allele frequencies in African American (AA) and European American (EA)
subpopulations. Variants that have an allele frequency greater than expected for the disorder in at least one subpopulation (AA or EA) of individuals not
known to have the disorder can be considered to have strong evidence of benign impact (BS1). Variants known to be pathogenic for dominant disorders
should have allele frequencies in the general population below the population disease incidence or and pathogenic variants for recessive disorders should
have heterozygous frequencies consistent with their disease incidence. The allele frequencies shown in the table for certain variants are lower for certain
benign and higher for certain pathogenic variants than the disease incidence/carrier frequency; therefore other data would be required to classify these
variants. Variants represented in the concordance column are designated as partial when a subpopulation frequency does not conform as above or when
concordance is not achieved. Variants are designated as having partial concordance when a single subpopulation frequency is inconsistent with the
classification.

Author Manuscript

Table 6
Richards et al.
Page 37

KMT2D (MLL2)

CHD7

GJB2
HFE

Kabuki syndrome

CHARGE syndrome

GJB2 associated
hearing loss

Hemochromatosis

MECP2

Author Manuscript

Rett syndrome

AR

AR

AD

AD

X Linked

All

Not specific

Not specific

Not specific

Not specific

Population

0.040%

0.067%

0.010%

0.003%

0.012%

Incidence

Author Manuscript
Inheritance

8.3%

2.5%

de novo

de novo

de novo

Carrier
Frequency

p.C282Y

c.35delG

Common Mutation

0.780%

Ex2:c.856A>G / p.R286Gly
(Benign)

Ex4:c.845G>A / p.C282Y
(Other Reportable)

1.520%

0.090%

1.250%

Ex2:c.35delG (Pathogenic)

1.460%

Ex31:c.6478G>A / p.A2160T
(Benign)

0.000%

Ex31:c.6836G>A / p.Gly2279E
(Benign)
Ex2:c.309G>A / p.(=) (Benign)

0.000%

0.830%

IVS31:c.8047-15C>T (Benign)

Ex4:c.683C>G / p.T228S
(Pathogenic)

0.000%

3.950%

Ex61:c.10585G>C / p.E3529Q
(Benign)

Ex4:c.608C>T / p.T203M
(Benign)

0.360%

Ex65:c.11525G>T / p.R3842L
(Benign)

0.030%

1.380%

Ex17:c.1587T>C / p.(=)
(Benign)

Ex4:c.1161C>T / p.(=)
(Benign)

ESP6500
AA MAF

Variant Classification

Author Manuscript

Gene

6.410%

1.080%

0.000%

0.000%

0.000%

0.120%

0.020%

0.000%

0.060%

0.000%

0.010%

2.430%

6.860%

ESP6500
EA MAF

4.750%

0.740%

0.250%

0.390%

0.490%

0.080%

0.020%

0.300%

0.040%

0.010%

1.350%

1.730%

5.010%

ESP6500
All MAF

No

No

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Partial

Concordance

Author Manuscript

Disease

Multiple publications

Multiple publications

AA MAF

AA MAF

AA MAF

EA MAF

EA MAF

RETT database

Multiple publications

AA MAF

AA MAF

EA MAF

EA MAF

Evidence to support
classification

Richards et al.

Genet Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 01.

Page 38

